High in this video we're going to look at integers in Python.
So that integer obviously is the end data type.
We've seen that before.
It's an object you know like everything else in Python and intuitively we know what integers are the
numbers right.
It's the integral numbers like 0 10 the negative ones like minus 10 maybe big ones 100 million two billion
two trillion and so on.
So the question that comes to mind is well how big can they become either positive or negative.
So in other words we're really thinking about what's the largest magnitude right the magnitude being
the absolute value.
So let's not worry about the sign.
How big can that become.
So first in order to understand that we have to look at how integers are stored in our computers.
While computers only use binary they use bits zeros and ones and everything is represented using zeros
and ones including numbers.
So our integers are represented using binary base to not decimal.
So it's like a look at a number OK when we're working in base 2.
These are the numerical values of each digits that we have in our number.
And here's our number 1 0 0 1 1 that's a base to numbers.
And these are the individual bits of that number right the bits being 0 or 1.
So we find out what the decimal representation is of the binary number we just add up one time 16 0
times 8 0 times 4 one times two and one times one.
That's what we have.
And when we add all that up we get 19.
In other words 1 0 0 1 1 base 2 is equal to 19 base 10.
So representing that decimal number 19 required 5 bits and we needed 5 bits in order to store and represent
19 in binary in base 2.
So we might ask the other question what is the largest integer number that can be represented using
8 bits.
Right.
How far can we go.
Well let's assume first that we only care about non-negative integers that 0.
And up we don't care about the negative integers.
We'll bring that back in a bit.
Well that means that we have 8 bits to work with.
Right.
So these are big bits.
1 1 1 8 8 times so that a number that we can work with is 128 plus 64 plus 32 plus 16 etc..
Right.
And that's equal to 255.
So the largest number we can use is 255 which is 2 to the power of 8 minus one.
Notice the relationship between 8 bits over here and 8 over here in this expression.
OK.
Now if we care about handling negative integers Let's bring that back into the mix.
Well we're going to need to use one of those bits if we want to stick to 8 bits we'll need to use one
of those bits to store the sign.
A positive or is it negative.
So we'll only have 7 bits that we can work with.
So using 7 bits well to the seven minus one following the same path and here is the maximum magnitude
is going to be 127 so theoretically we are able to represent all the numbers in the range minus 127
to 127 here.
We were if we only cared about positive numbers.
We were able to represent numbers in the range 0 to 255.
Now zero itself doesn't have a sign it's neither really positive not negative.
Right it's not considered negative and it's not considered positive either.
So we can actually squeeze out an extra number in this range because while we don't need to you know
slots in this range to represent zero.
And usually the way the numbers are encoded is that it gets added to the bottom.
So now we can reach from minus 128 to 127.
So here's the formula.
If we look looking at using 8 bits of storage for a signed integer our range will be from minus 2 to
the 8 minus one up to 2 to the 8 minus 1 minus 1.
That's the general formula you can put you know and minus one where n is the number of bits that you
want to use for storage.
So what about 16 bits of 16 bits.
2 to the power of 15 is this number here thirty two thousand seven hundred sixty eight and our range
therefore will be from minus 32000 768 up to thirty two thousand 767.
That's when we use 16 bits but about 32 bits.
Well we do the same calculation and we end up of this range you know minus 2 billion something to 2
billion something.
Now we are an unsigned integer type are thoroughly to put range would be a lot larger.
Right.
It would basically double up because we're not dealing with the negative numbers would start at zero
and so therefore we expand to the right.
Here's we'd seen in the beginning of the video.
So as a quick side note which is kind of interesting.
Let's say you're working on a 32 bit operating system.
And if you have done that in the past you know that there is a limitation to the amount of memory that
the 32 bit operating system can use.
Right.
You may have as you know a PC and you went ahead and bought maybe you know 32 gigs of RAM and you put
that in and you fire up windows 30 to boot.
And it tells you that you know you have way less something under 4 gigs like what's going on.
I've got 64 gigs of memory in my computer.
Why am I only able to access you know four gigabytes well memory space right is limited by the address
number.
If you think back to what we've done in the past.
Well every variable is just you know a pointer to something in memory that pointer is an integer number
that represents the memory address right of where that variable data is stored.
Well those addresses are integers and so they need to.
You don't have a certain number of bits that they can use to store that address.
And so in a 32 bit architecture our addresses are limited to 32 bits.
Right.
So the address itself is limited to a 32 bit integer.
So let's take a look at what that means.
Well every address is a byte.
So we're looking at the maximum number of addresses.
Right.
Which is this number here.
But as bytes That's how many bytes we can you know use up essentially because that's the total number
of addresses that we can use and each address is one byte.
So when we do the multiplication we can convert you know this is the number of bytes and now we can
divide by this to get kilobytes or we're looking at 4000000 something kilobytes.
Convert that to megabytes.
We get four thousand ninety six megs.
Convert that to gigs.
We get four gigs.
That's the theoretical limit.
Right so that's why if you know you can throw in more memory into your motherboard.
But if you're using a 32 bit architecture you're not going to be able to address all of that memory.
Now there are always operating systems and get around that and do other things.
But that's beside the point.
All right.
So that was just a quick side note.
So but basically the thing is how large an integer can be depends on how many bits you want to use to
store up the images.
So some languages like Java and C actually have different data types for different lengths of integers
and so they have a fixed number of bits and you have to decide as you're writing your code thinking
wow I'm going to use an integer here.
But how big is it going to be.
What it's what is it you know throughout the lifetime of this program.
How big is the integer going to become.
And you have to up front kind of design and define Well you know I'm going to make it a you know pretty
short integer because I know my values are going to be you know from maybe from minus 10 to 10 right.
That's never going to go beyond that.
For some reason other times you may see something that's larger.
So these languages and I'll use Java as an example because it's consistent across platforms.
Provide you these different data types.
So for example they have the byte data type and the byte data type as you may imagine uses 8 bits and
it's a sine 8 bit number which means it's range from minus 128 to 127.
Similarly they have a short which is a 16 bit number side so minus thirty two thousand something to
thirty two thousand seven hundred sixty seven.
You have an int right now an end is a 32 bit number.
It's a sine 32 bit numbers so its range is bigger than its all using its potential notation here.
You also have a long which is a 64 bit number which is going to be in that range and so on.
Right.
There are other things too there are more and some languages will also provide you signed and unsigned
variants so you may decide that this is only going to be an and you know a positive integer.
So I can use an unsigned variable type so you may have an unsigned int.
Some languages allow you to do that now Python doesn't work that way in Python.
The object is to remember an object uses a variable number of bits and as your number gets bigger it
will just increase the number of bits that it needs to use to store that integer.
So it may use 32 bits 64 bits 96 bits and so on.
And that's completely seamless to us.
So it's in it's kind of important and interesting to know what's going on behind the scenes.
Right.
It's doing that division of the number up into multiple you know bits and it keeps increasing the number
of bits as it needs to.
But we don't have to actually think about it as we're writing our code right now since integers actually
objects.
There's also an overhead associated with each of those we'll see that in the code section.
But theoretically you know how big can the integer become in Python while it's limited by the amount
of memory that you have available for the program.
Now one thing to watch out for.
I mean of course larger numbers will use more memory right.
You got a huge integer number it may require 128 bits so maybe 256 bits of memory to store that number
but that's not the only thing that happens as you get larger and larger numbers especially once you
get past the 32 bit if you're working in a 32 bit OS or 64 bit.
If you're walking you know in a 64 bit architecture as you get beyond that point to do operations the
just the sample you know the standard arithmetic operations like addition subtraction multiplication
and so on it will get slower and slower.
The CPQ is going have to do more and more work to let's say add two integers right in a 32 bit operating
system it might be able to add to 32 bit integers in one operation on the zebu.
But if you grow beyond that well it's going to take now more than one operation to add you know to integers
that are larger than 32 bits as we're going to have to do them in chunks.
So again this is seamless to us but do be aware that as your integer numbers in Python get bigger and
bigger your computational speeds are going to decrease
looking at some code.
Let's just see again the type of integers.
So we can say print type of some integer.
A 100.
And as you can see it's a class of type and so integers are objects.
So we can take a look at how much storage space how much memory is being used when we create integers.
So it get it first import the cist module and we're going to use the get size of method that's in the
system that allows us to you know find out how much memory is being used to store a particular variable
for a particular value.
So we're going to say this get size of.
And let's start with the integers 0.
And as you can see it takes up 24 bytes and we can think of that is the overhead that we get when we
create an integer object because it you know the object itself requires some memory to get created and
stored.
So we can think of 24 bytes as the overhead every time you create an you know an integer object you're
going to use up at least 24 bytes and then you're also on top of that going to need bytes to store the
number itself.
Zero doesn't require anything more than you know nothing or one bit.
So we can think of it that way.
So we can look at Psystar to get the size of one right which is the smallest non-zero integer we can
think of.
That requires twenty eight bytes.
So you can see it's used for bytes to store that number for bytes being 32 bits right.
8 bits per byte.
So 32 bits used to store one.
Now we can look at get the size of the hall look at some big number let's say 1000 k.
And as you can see now we are using 160 bytes right which is much bigger.
How many bits that we use for the actual number.
Well we can look at you know if you want to do that calculation 160 minus the overhead of 24 that's
the number of bytes K and times 8 to get the number of bits.
So we use a thousand eighty eight bits.
So that's how many bits we use to store this large integer value here which you want to see it printed
out to.
I have the they're not going to try and read it out but that's the integer number.
So you can see you can work with large integer numbers in Python.
It's completely seamless.
Right.
We write what we write.
We don't have to worry about you know trying to fit it inside a fixed width data type fix with meaning
you know a fixed number of bytes that it can use to store the value.
OK.
Now I did mention that you know over and above requiring more memory to store large integers it also
slows down the calculations.
So let's take a look at an example of that.
So we're going to import the time library.
Again we're going to do this cause I benchmark the benchmarks that just you know kind of quick and dirty
timings and first thing we're going to do is we're going to create a method let's call it Kelk.
We're going to pass at some value in integers.
In this case will pass in and we're going to repeat an operation.
Let's do it 10 million times 10.
One two three four five six.
OK.
So we'll do 10 million times and all we're going to do here is we're going to multiply that integer
by two.
So we're just going to double it up and we're not going to.
We don't store it in a variable.
We're not going to print it out.
We just want to do the calculation not just want to try and limit it all what we're going to time to
just the calculation itself.
So that's our method.
And now we're going to time it.
So let's do time perf counters.
Right.
That's our start time.
We're going to do that calculation we're going to pass in let's say a small integer 10 and then and
we'll be timed out of count.
And we're going to print the and mine minus stuff.
Ok so very similar to what we've done in the past.
So if we run this well took half a second to run.
And depending on the CPI you're running on on.
And they are in the system you're running on and what else is happening in the background you'll get
different values obviously.
So now let's do the same thing.
So I'm going to copy and paste this code but this time instead of doing 10 we're going to do that big
number we saw before and actually I won't get that big that fast Let's do you know two to the power
of 100.
OK.
Two to the power of 100.
If you want to see what that looks like that's you know a fairly large number.
So let's do that and let's Tynemouth and it took 0.9 seconds.
Right.
So as you can see it started slowing down.
We can do this one more time.
And in this case I'm going to do that big number we saw before that two to the power of 1000.
Actually I'll go even bigger.
How about that.
How about two to the power of ten thousand.
How big is that number.
Oh that's that's pretty hefty right.
That's a large integer.
So let's go ahead and do that.
So instead of 100 we're going to do ten thousand K that's what we had here.
OK.
This big number has 10000.
All right.
So let's run that and we'll have to have a little bit of patience.
There we go.
Six point six nine seconds.
So you can see the performance difference here was little more noticeable than before.
So bottom line you can use arbitrary large integer numbers in Python.
It will handle it seamlessly for us but we just have to understand that as the numbers get bigger.
Not only do they require more memory for storage but the operations will get slower as well.
All right.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in the next video.